site_reliability_engineering/site_reliability_engineering_practices.md, before:

# Site Reliability Engineering

## Practices 

> We can characterize the health of a service—in much the same way that Abraham Maslow categorized human needs [Mas43]—from the most basic requirements needed for a system to function as a service at all to the higher levels of function—permitting self-actualization and taking active control of the direction of the service rather than reactively fighting fires.

Below you'll find the *Hierarchy of Production Needs*:

<img src="srle_01.png" alt="Basic requirements of a system based on Maslow's pyramid of needs" width="400"/>

### Collecting Data

In order to identify the risk tolerance of your consumer services consider the following:

* target level of availability
* types of failures
* cost
* other service metrics

Once appropriate metrics have been identified and agreed upon, consider using an **error budgets**. 

The main benefit of an error budget is that it provides both product development and SREs with a common incentive to find a balance between innovation and reliability.

For example:
A service needs to have 99% availability. Therefore the error budget allows for 1% downtime.

While the system meets this objective, product development can take more risks. However, as the budget is being drained, product developers themselves will add more tests or slow down their velocity to ensure they don't exceed the budget. If the budget is ever exceeded, releases are temporarily halted while additional resources are invested in resilience and performance. 

In this way the error budget helps balance risk with cost.

Be careful when **aggregating raw measurements**. Even for seemingly straightforward metrics like number of requests per second served, incorrect aggregation obscure important information.

> Is the measurement obtained once a second, or by averaging requests over a minute? The latter may hide much higher instantaneous request rates in bursts that last for only a few seconds. Consider a system that serves 200 requests/s in even-numbered seconds, and 0 in the others. It has the same average load as one that serves a constant 100 requests/s, but has an instantaneous load that is twice as large as the average one.

Use percentiles instead - differentiating between the 99th or 99.9th percentile and the 50th percentile will give you detail about both the worst-case scenario and the typical user experience. 

> We generally prefer to work with percentiles rather than the mean (arithmetic average) of a set of values.  Doing so makes it possible to consider the long tail of data points, which often have significantly different (and more interesting) characteristics than the average.  Because of the artificial nature of computing systems, data points are often skewed—for instance, no request can have a response in less than 0 ms, and a timeout at 1,000 ms means that there can be no successful responses with values greater than the timeout. As a result, we cannot assume that the mean and the median are the same—or even close to each other!

### Monitoring

Monitoring is one of the main ways we can track the system's health and availability. 

> Without monitoring, you have no way to tell whether the service is even working; absent a thoughtfully designed monitoring infrastructure, you’re flying blind. Monitoring enables service owners to make rational decisions about the impact of changes to the service, apply the scientific method to incident response, and of course ensure their reason for existence: to measure the service’s alignment with business goals.

## Types of monitoring:

There are two ways you can approach your monitoring, and both comlement each other, to build a clearer picture of the behaviour of your software in production:

### White-box monitoring
Think of your service as if it's in a transparent box, where you know the internals of your system. They are exposed, and inspectable from the oustide. This type of monitoring is great for indentifying which components are failing, where your bottlenecks are. However, it doesn't tell you what your users see and whether mission-critical functionality is being impacted or not. It also means that you have to predict the failure scenarios, in order to monitor and alert on them. 

### Black-box monitoring
Unlike with white-box monitoring, think of your service as if it's in an opaque box, where you have no idea how your system is set up on the inside. This type of monitoring works well for looking at your service's critical functionality but it lacks the granularity of white-box monitoring.

## Alerting

> Monitoring should never require a human to interpret any part of the alerting domain. Instead, software should do the interpreting, and humans should be notified only when they need to take action.

Create alerts on the the the high-level service objectives, but make sure you still have **granular data** to debug and inspect any individual components. 

There are three kinds of alerts:
* pages - where a human needs to take action immedietly 
* tickets - where a human needs to take action but not immedietly
* logging - useful for diagnostic and forensic purposes



### Incident Response

### Postmortem and Root-Cause Analysis

> We aim to be alerted on and manually solve only new and exciting problems presented by our service; it’s woefully boring to “fix” the same issue over and over. In fact, this mindset is one of the key differentiators between the SRE philosophy and some more traditional operations-focused environments. 

### Testing

### Capacity Planning

### Development

### Product

Commit message:

Add notes for ch 11, Being on-call

site_reliability_engineering/site_reliability_engineering_practices.md, after:

# Site Reliability Engineering

## Practices 

> We can characterize the health of a service—in much the same way that Abraham Maslow categorized human needs [Mas43]—from the most basic requirements needed for a system to function as a service at all to the higher levels of function—permitting self-actualization and taking active control of the direction of the service rather than reactively fighting fires.

Below you'll find the *Hierarchy of Production Needs*:

<img src="srle_01.png" alt="Basic requirements of a system based on Maslow's pyramid of needs" width="400"/>

### Collecting Data

In order to identify the risk tolerance of your consumer services consider the following:

* target level of availability
* types of failures
* cost
* other service metrics

Once appropriate metrics have been identified and agreed upon, consider using an **error budgets**. 

The main benefit of an error budget is that it provides both product development and SREs with a common incentive to find a balance between innovation and reliability.

For example:
A service needs to have 99% availability. Therefore the error budget allows for 1% downtime.

While the system meets this objective, product development can take more risks. However, as the budget is being drained, product developers themselves will add more tests or slow down their velocity to ensure they don't exceed the budget. If the budget is ever exceeded, releases are temporarily halted while additional resources are invested in resilience and performance. 

In this way the error budget helps balance risk with cost.

Be careful when **aggregating raw measurements**. Even for seemingly straightforward metrics like number of requests per second served, incorrect aggregation obscure important information.

> Is the measurement obtained once a second, or by averaging requests over a minute? The latter may hide much higher instantaneous request rates in bursts that last for only a few seconds. Consider a system that serves 200 requests/s in even-numbered seconds, and 0 in the others. It has the same average load as one that serves a constant 100 requests/s, but has an instantaneous load that is twice as large as the average one.

Use percentiles instead - differentiating between the 99th or 99.9th percentile and the 50th percentile will give you detail about both the worst-case scenario and the typical user experience. 

> We generally prefer to work with percentiles rather than the mean (arithmetic average) of a set of values.  Doing so makes it possible to consider the long tail of data points, which often have significantly different (and more interesting) characteristics than the average.  Because of the artificial nature of computing systems, data points are often skewed—for instance, no request can have a response in less than 0 ms, and a timeout at 1,000 ms means that there can be no successful responses with values greater than the timeout. As a result, we cannot assume that the mean and the median are the same—or even close to each other!

#### Measure your toil

> Ideally, symptoms of operational overload should be measurable, so that the goals can be quantified (e.g., number of daily tickets < 5, paging events per shift < 2).

### Monitoring

Monitoring is one of the main ways we can track the system's health and availability. 

> Without monitoring, you have no way to tell whether the service is even working; absent a thoughtfully designed monitoring infrastructure, you’re flying blind. Monitoring enables service owners to make rational decisions about the impact of changes to the service, apply the scientific method to incident response, and of course ensure their reason for existence: to measure the service’s alignment with business goals.

## Types of monitoring:

There are two ways you can approach your monitoring, and both comlement each other, to build a clearer picture of the behaviour of your software in production:

### White-box monitoring
Think of your service as if it's in a transparent box, where you know the internals of your system. They are exposed, and inspectable from the oustide. This type of monitoring is great for indentifying which components are failing, where your bottlenecks are. However, it doesn't tell you what your users see and whether mission-critical functionality is being impacted or not. It also means that you have to predict the failure scenarios, in order to monitor and alert on them. 

### Black-box monitoring
Unlike with white-box monitoring, think of your service as if it's in an opaque box, where you have no idea how your system is set up on the inside. This type of monitoring works well for looking at your service's critical functionality but it lacks the granularity of white-box monitoring.

## Alerting

> Monitoring should never require a human to interpret any part of the alerting domain. Instead, software should do the interpreting, and humans should be notified only when they need to take action.

Create alerts on the the the high-level service objectives, but make sure you still have **granular data** to debug and inspect any individual components. 

There are three kinds of alerts:
* pages - where a human needs to take action immedietly 
* tickets - where a human needs to take action but not immedietly
* logging - useful for diagnostic and forensic purposes


#### Pager fatigue
Too many alerts will reduce on-call efficiency. If there's a lot of noisy alerts, engineers are likely to either ignore real issues or make the wrong assumptions about what's causing the outage.

Make sure that you have a low signal-to-noise ratio. As well as removing false positives, double check if you can bring your alert/incident ratio closer to 1:1, to avoid on-call engineers receiving duplicate alerts for the same incident. If multiple related alerts need to be fired, then make sure that they are grouped together, to make traiging and debuging easier.


#### A Treacherous Enemy: Operational Underload

> Being on-call for a quiet system is blissful, but what happens if the system is too quiet or when SREs are not on-call often enough? An operational underload is undesirable for an SRE team. Being out of touch with production for long periods of time can lead to confidence issues, both in terms of overconfidence and underconfidence, while knowledge gaps are discovered only when an incident occurs.


### Incident Response

#### On-call

Have an agreed response-time between the engineers and the product owners. This response time should be based on the determined level of availability of your service aka page only when your SLOs are being threathened. At Google, highly-critical services might have a response time of 5 minutes, compared to internal facing ones, which would have a longer response time: for example 30 minutes. 

Pages are expensive and affect people's work-life balance. Keep them to a minimum by investing in reliabtility. This is why SREs spend at least 50% of their time on active engineering work.

Each page has operational overhead - "root-cause analysis, remediation, and follow-up activities like writing a postmortem and fixing bugs". These are important steps for identifying how to avoid an incident repeating again and again, draining resources and morale. But they also take time in order to be done right, and this means there's only so many pages you can handle as a team.

In order to build a sense of safety for on-call engineers, make sure you have:

* Clear escalation paths
* Well-defined incident-management procedures
* A blameless postmortem culture

### Postmortem and Root-Cause Analysis

> We aim to be alerted on and manually solve only new and exciting problems presented by our service; it’s woefully boring to “fix” the same issue over and over. In fact, this mindset is one of the key differentiators between the SRE philosophy and some more traditional operations-focused environments. 

> It’s important to evaluate what went wrong, recognize what went well, and take action to prevent the same errors from recurring in the future. SRE teams must write postmortemsafter significant incidents and detail a full timeline of the eventsthat occurred. By focusing on events rather than the people, these postmortems provide significant value. Rather than placing blame on individuals, they derive value from the systematic analysis of production incidents. Mistakes happen, and software should make sure that we make as few mistakes as possible. Recognizing automation opportunities is one of the best ways to prevent human errors 

### Testing

### Capacity Planning

### Development

### Product
